Updated the podAffinity concept documentation (#48083)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node.md

### Inter-pod affinity and anti-affinity

Inter-pod affinity and anti-affinity allow you to constrain which nodes your
Pods can be scheduled on based on the labels of Pods already running on that
node, instead of the node labels.

#### Existing Pods' Affinity and Anti-Affinity Considerations

> When scheduling a new Pod, the Kubernetes scheduler evaluates both the incoming Pod's affinity/anti-affinity rules and those of the existing Pods in the cluster. Here's how these rules are processed:

Reviewer: Did you forget to remove this section?

### Inter-pod affinity and anti-affinity

Inter-pod affinity and anti-affinity allow you to constrain which nodes your
Pods can be scheduled on based on the labels of Pods already running on that
node, instead of the node labels.

#### Existing Pods' Affinity and Anti-Affinity Considerations

When scheduling a new Pod, the Kubernetes scheduler evaluates both the incoming Pod's affinity/anti-affinity rules and those of the existing Pods in the cluster. Here's how these rules are processed:

1. Hard Constraints (Node Filtering):
   - Incoming Pod's `podAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     - The scheduler ensures that the new Pod is scheduled onto a node that satisfies the required affinity rules based on the existing Pods.
   - Incoming Pod's `podAntiAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     - The scheduler filters out nodes that do not satisfy the required anti-affinity rules, ensuring that the new Pod does not get scheduled onto nodes where it would violate these rules.
   - Existing Pods' `podAntiAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:

>      - The scheduler treats these as hard constraints, filtering out any nodes that do not comply with the anti-affinity requirements of existing Pods. This ensures that the new Pod does not end up on a node that would violate the anti-affinity rules of existing Pods.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to mention this.
The assessment has been covered when explaining the constraints on the "Incoming Pods".
The bullet won't help much in clarifying anything. On the contrary, it may confuse users.

2. Soft Constraints (Scoring):
   - Incoming Pod's `podAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     - The scheduler scores nodes based on how well they satisfy the preferred affinity rules, aiming to place the new Pod in locations that optimize for these preferences.
   - Incoming Pod's `podAntiAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     - Similar to preferred affinity, the scheduler scores nodes to avoid anti-affinity preferences, aiming to minimize conflicts.
   - Existing Pods' `podAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:

>      - The scheduler treats them as soft constraints, and scores nodes based on how well they satisfy the affinity requirements of existing Pods, promoting optimal placement without enforcing strict rules.

Reviewer 2: Same as above.

3. Ignored Fields:
   - Existing Pods' `podAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     - These preferred affinity rules are not considered during the scheduling decision for new Pods.
   - Existing Pods' `podAntiAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:

>      - Similarly, preferred anti-affinity rules of existing Pods are ignored during scheduling.

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest we remove line 260-264.
The affinity settings of "Existing Pods" are treated as data source when assessing the affinity settings of "Incoming Pods". They are not changed (i.e. ignored) during scheduling.

The point is ... we don't have any mechanisms to re-assess Pod affinity during execution. The current implementation was based on an over-design. In other words,
there is nothing "required" or "ignored" during execution.

Reviewer 2: For more contexts (how the community wants to improve this affinity handling with "required-during-execution"), you can check https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4329/files

Reviewer 3: > we don't have any mechanisms to re-assess Pod affinity during execution. The current implementation was based on an over-design. In other words,

We have one thing I know of: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/descheduler
(but as an interim approach it relies on the existing allowed values for this field).

Reviewer: > https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/48083#discussion_r1804138708

That's for node affinity though. There aren't any open efforts for pod affinity.

Pods can be scheduled on based on the labels of **Pods** already running on that
node, instead of the node labels.

> #### Existing Pods' Affinity and Anti-Affinity Considerations

Reviewer: This is more of a detail of the feature, so it should be after "type of inter-pod affinity and anti-affinity"

Author: @alculquicondor Sure, I will update on it .

Pods can be scheduled on based on the labels of **Pods** already running on that
node, instead of the node labels.

> <<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer: It looks like you made a mistake when rebasing. Please fix.

Reviewer: still not fixed

=======
#### Existing Pods' Affinity and Anti-Affinity Considerations

When scheduling a new Pod, the Kubernetes scheduler evaluates both the incoming Pod's affinity/anti-affinity rules and those of the existing Pods in the cluster. Here's how these rules are processed:

> 1. **Hard Constraints (Node Filtering):**

Reviewer 2: Why are we adding so many double stars?

Author: Remove the stars, @tengqm

     - The scheduler filters out nodes that do not satisfy the required anti-affinity rules, ensuring that the new Pod does not get scheduled onto nodes where it would violate these rules.
   - **Existing Pods' `podAntiAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**
     - The scheduler treats these as hard constraints, filtering out any nodes that do not comply with the anti-affinity requirements of existing Pods. This ensures that the new Pod does not end up on a node that would violate the anti-affinity rules of existing Pods.

2. **Soft Constraints (Scoring):**
   - **Incoming Pod's `podAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**
     - The scheduler scores nodes based on how well they satisfy the preferred affinity rules, aiming to place the new Pod in locations that optimize for these preferences.
   - **Incoming Pod's `podAntiAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**
     - Similar to preferred affinity, the scheduler scores nodes to avoid anti-affinity preferences, aiming to minimize conflicts.
   - **Existing Pods' `podAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**

>      - These are treated as soft constraints, and nodes are scored based on how well they satisfy the affinity requirements of existing Pods, promoting optimal placement without enforcing strict rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - The scheduler treats them as soft constraints, and scores nodes based on how well they satisfy the affinity requirements of existing Pods, promoting optimal placement without enforcing strict rules.
```

Reviewer: https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-active-voice

Author: Fix the issue

3. **Ignored Fields:**
   - **Existing Pods' `podAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**

>      - These preferred affinity rules are not considered during the scheduling decision for new Pods.

Reviewer: https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-active-voice

Reviewer: still not addressed

Reviewer 3: Nice if you fix this @aryasoni98

   - **Existing Pods' `podAntiAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**

>      - Similarly, preferred anti-affinity rules of existing Pods are ignored during scheduling.

Reviewer: https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-active-voice

Reviewer 3: Nice if you fix this @aryasoni98

For inter-pod anti-affinity, use the `affinity.podAntiAffinity` field in the Pod
spec.

#### Existing Pods' Affinity and Anti-Affinity Considerations

When scheduling a new Pod, the Kubernetes scheduler evaluates both the incoming Pod's affinity/anti-affinity rules and those of existing Pods in the cluster. Here's how these rules are processed:

1. **Hard Constraints (Node Filtering):**
   - **Incoming Pod's `podAffinity` or `podAntiAffinity` with `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**

>      Ensures the new Pod is scheduled onto nodes that satisfy these required affinity and anti-affinity rules based on existing Pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     The scheduler rnsures the new Pod is assigned to nodes that satisfy these required affinity and anti-affinity rules based on existing Pods.
```

Reviewer: Similarly for the rest of the sections

Reviewer: Please apply the same suggestion for the rest of the sentences.

   - **Existing Pods' `podAntiAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**
     Treated as hard constraints, filtering out nodes that violate existing Pods' required anti-affinity rules.

> 2. **Soft Constraints (Scoring):**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Soft Constraints (Node Scoring):**
```

For inter-pod anti-affinity, use the `affinity.podAntiAffinity` field in the Pod
spec.

#### Existing Pods' Affinity and Anti-Affinity Considerations

When scheduling a new Pod, the Kubernetes scheduler evaluates both the incoming Pod's affinity/anti-affinity rules and those of the existing Pods in the cluster. Here's how these rules are processed:

1. **Hard Constraints (Node Filtering):**

>    - **Incoming Pod's `podAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**

Reviewer: can you just mention this field and `podAntiAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` in one sentence, since there's really no special treatment among the two

Author: That's a great point! Both podAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution and podAntiAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution are treated similarly as hard constraints during scheduling. I'll combine them into a single sentence to improve clarity:

Incoming Pod's podAffinity or podAntiAffinity with requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution: Ensures the new Pod is scheduled onto nodes that satisfy these required affinity or anti-affinity rules based on existing Pods.
Thank you for the suggestion—I believe this will make the documentation more concise and easier to understand.

Reviewer: It looks like you reverted this change?

For inter-pod anti-affinity, use the `affinity.podAntiAffinity` field in the Pod
spec.

#### Existing Pods' Affinity and Anti-Affinity Considerations

When scheduling a new Pod, the Kubernetes scheduler evaluates both the incoming Pod's affinity/anti-affinity rules and those of existing Pods in the cluster. Here's how these rules are processed:

1. Hard Constraints (Node Filtering):
   - Incoming Pod's `podAffinity` or `podAntiAffinity` with `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     The scheduler ensures the new Pod is assigned to nodes that satisfy these required affinity and anti-affinity rules based on existing Pods.
   - Existing Pods' `podAntiAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     Treated as hard constraints, filtering out nodes that violate existing Pods' required anti-affinity rules.

>    - Incoming Pod's `podAffinity` or `podAntiAffinity` with `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:

Reviewer: This looks duplicated

     The scheduler ensures the new Pod is assigned to nodes that satisfy these required affinity and anti-affinity rules based on existing Pods.
   - Existing Pods' `podAntiAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:**
     The scheduler treats these as hard constraints, filtering out nodes that violate existing Pods' required anti-affinity rules.

2. Soft Constraints (Node Scoring):
   - Incoming Pod's `podAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` and `podAntiAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:

>      Scores nodes based on how well they meet these preferred affinity and anti-affinity rules to optimize Pod placement.

Reviewer: Use the same language every time:

"The scheduler scores"

   - Existing Pods' `podAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:

>      Treated as soft constraints, scoring nodes based on how well they satisfy existing Pods' required affinity rules.

Reviewer: "The scheduler treats"

For inter-pod anti-affinity, use the `affinity.podAntiAffinity` field in the Pod
spec.

#### Existing Pods' Affinity and Anti-Affinity Considerations

When scheduling a new Pod, the Kubernetes scheduler evaluates both the incoming Pod's affinity/anti-affinity rules and those of existing Pods in the cluster. Here's how these rules are processed:

1. Hard Constraints (Node Filtering):
   - Incoming Pod's `podAffinity` or `podAntiAffinity` with `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     The scheduler ensures the new Pod is assigned to nodes that satisfy these required affinity and anti-affinity rules based on existing Pods.
   - Existing Pods' `podAntiAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:

>      Treated as hard constraints, filtering out nodes that violate existing Pods' required anti-affinity rules.

Reviewer 2: The `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` property, as its name suggests,
is not supposed impact an existing Pod.
In Kubernetes, Pods are by default scheduled only once. I'm not sure when the scheduler
will "filter out nodes" for an existing Pod.

With that, I think there are things to improve in the organization of these constraints/conditions.

Author: I believe I have addressed all the feedback and resolved the issues you pointed out. The commit history has been cleaned up, and all unnecessary references have been removed as per the repository guidelines. Additionally, the documentation has been reorganized for better clarity and understanding.

Please review the latest changes at your convenience and let me know if there's anything else that needs attention.

Thank you for your guidance and assistance!

     Scores nodes based on how well they meet these preferred affinity and anti-affinity rules to optimize Pod placement.
   - Existing Pods' `podAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     Treated as soft constraints, scoring nodes based on how well they satisfy existing Pods' required affinity rules.
   - Incoming Pod's `podAffinity` or `podAntiAffinity` with `preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     The scheduler scores nodes based on how well they meet these preferred affinity and anti-affinity rules to optimize Pod placement.
   - Existing Pods' `podAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     The scheduler treats these as soft constraints, scoring nodes based on how well they satisfy existing Pods' required affinity rules.

3. Ignored Fields:
   - Existing Pods' `podAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` and `podAntiAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:
     Not considered during scheduling.
   - Existing Pods' `podAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` and `podAntiAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`:

>    - The scheduler does not consider these preferred affinity and anti-affinity rules during scheduling.

Reviewer 2: Same as above. We can safely remove the bullets about "Existing Pods".

Author: fix the issue

  affinity:
    podAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      # ensure that Pods associated with this tenant land on the correct node pool
      - matchLabelKeys:
          - tenant
        topologyKey: node-pool
    podAntiAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      # ensure that Pods associated with this tenant can't schedule to nodes used for another tenant
      - mismatchLabelKeys:
        - tenant # whatever the value of the "tenant" label for this Pod, prevent
                 # scheduling to nodes in any pool where any Pod from a different
                 # tenant is running.
        labelSelector:
          # We have to have the labelSelector which selects only Pods with the tenant label,

>           # otherwise this Pod would anti-affine Pods from daemonsets as well, for example,

Reviewer: Oh, that was not a good word for the concept, but affine is not a word, so, maybe this:

```suggestion
          # otherwise this Pod would have anti-affinity against Pods from daemonsets as well, for example,
```

Author: Thank you for catching that! You're absolutely right—using "affine" in that context isn't appropriate. I'll update the comment to:
# otherwise this Pod would have anti-affinity against Pods from daemonsets as well, for example,

This change makes the comment clearer and more accurate. I appreciate your suggestion!

  affinity:
    podAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      # ensure that Pods associated with this tenant land on the correct node pool
      - matchLabelKeys:
          - tenant
        topologyKey: node-pool
    podAntiAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      # ensure that Pods associated with this tenant can't schedule to nodes used for another tenant
      - mismatchLabelKeys:
        - tenant # whatever the value of the "tenant" label for this Pod, prevent
                 # scheduling to nodes in any pool where any Pod from a different
                 # tenant is running.
        labelSelector:
          # We have to have the labelSelector which selects only Pods with the tenant label,
          # otherwise this Pod would anti-affine Pods from daemonsets as well, for example,
          # which aren't supposed to have the tenant label.
          matchExpressions:
          - key: tenant
            operator: Exists
        topologyKey: node-pool
```

> #### More Practical Use-cases

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### More practical use cases
```

Author: fix the issue

Author: Fix the issue
